If an enemy is attacking you, you tend to know it.
If an enemy is tempting you, you often are aware of that.
If an enemy is accusing you, you usually know that's happening.
But,
If an enemy is deceiving you, you absolutely have no idea that it's happening.
We've been talking the last few weeks from the end of 1 John that the whole world is under the control of the evil one.
But of all of the things that the evil one does, attack, tempt,
accuse the worst thing that he does is deceive.
Jesus calls Satan the father of lies.
He was a liar from the beginning.
And when he speaks, he speaks his native language, which is lies.
He deceives all the time.
And while attacks are terrible and temptations are terrible and accusations are terrible, there is nothing as terrible as deception because a deceived person does not know they are being deceived.
Currently in our country in America and in countries around the world,
The political and cultural right is in ascendancy.
General ideas that often go with the political and cultural right, the idea of personal individual freedom, market-driven economies, the use of force in keeping the rule of law, these kinds of things, these ideas tend to be more to the forefront.
And many of us resonate with these aspects of the political
and cultural right.
But just a few years ago, the political and cultural left in America was more dominant force.
The idea of environmentalism or diversity and inclusion, the idea of freedom from social norms, those sorts of things that are associated with the political and cultural left, those were the dominant ideas of the day, and many of us
find ourselves resonating with the political and cultural left.
But the truth is, if the whole world is under the control of the evil one, then there is absolutely deception on both the political and cultural right and on the political and cultural left.
And the problem with deception is most of us can only see the deception on the side that we don't resonate with.
But it's not half the world that's under the control of the evil one.
It's not just half the technologies, half of the systems, half of the governments,
that are under the control of the evil one.
It's not like Satan's in control of Hollywood, but not Wall Street.
Or Satan's in control of Silicon Valley, but not Washington DC.
The whole world is under the control of the evil one, which means there is deception everywhere.
Not just on the side we don't resonate with,
But on our side as well.
But if there is deception everywhere.
And the problem with deception is the person being deceived doesn't know they're being deceived.
What hope is there?
How could anyone ever identify truth in the midst
of a world that is being deceived.
Well, at the end of the letter of 1 John as we studied a couple weeks ago, after God announces the bad news that the whole world is being deceived by Satan, he also announces the good news.
The church is not under Satan's control and that God has provided
through Jesus, a way that you and I can be undisceived in a world that is full of deception.
We want to think together about that today.
So let me invite you to take a Bible and turn to the letter of 2 John.
2 John is right near the end of the Bible.
It's page 989.
in the Bibles in the rack in front of you.
Second, John.
It's the perfect follow-up to the end of first, John.
The end of first, John, God says, the whole world's under Satan's control, but through Jesus, God has made a way for us to know the truth.
Second John follows up on that.
We're gonna read verses seven to 13, the second half of Second John page 989.
John writes in verse seven, I say this because many deceivers who do not acknowledge Jesus Christ as coming in the flesh have gone out into the world.
Any such person
is the deceiver and the antichrist.
Watch out that you do not lose what we have worked for, but that you may be rewarded fully.
Anyone who runs ahead and does not continue in the teaching of Christ does not have God.
Whoever continues in the teaching has both the Father and the Son.
If anyone comes to you
and does not bring this teaching.
Do not take them into your house or welcome them.
Anyone who welcomes them shares in their wicked work.
I have much to write you, but I do not want to use paper and ink.
Instead, I hope to visit you and talk with you face to face so that our joy may be complete.
The children of your sister who is chosen by God send their greetings.
Now I said last week, if you come back this week, you will get to see the completion of an entire book of the Bible.
So here you are, last week the first half of second John, this week the second half of second John.
And guess what?
If you've been here for just two weeks, you can be like, I attended Calvary Church as they preached through an entire book of the Bible.
So good for you, we're glad you're here.
But we need to not forget that the second half of the book of John
is intimately connected to the first half of the book of 2nd John.
John starts our passage, verse 7, I say this because, well, what's the this?
Well, it's what he just said at the end of last week's message in verse 6.
In verse 6, what Jesus was telling us was that we as a church
need to collectively show love to the world.
Why?
I say this because many deceivers have gone out into the world.
The reason why God needs the church to love the world is because the whole world is being deceived.
Not just one side or the other,
Not just one set of technologies or one government or one culture or one system.
The whole world is subject to deception.
And God says, I need the church, us, collectively, to be love in this world.
How do we do that?
Well, the first half of Second John is about love.
The second half of 2nd John is about truth.
And it feels bare with me.
The parallel works something like this.
In verse five of 2nd John, God says, I need you, ah, set Calvary, to love each other internally so that we collectively, as Calvary Church, can love the world because of deception.
So we love in here,
so that we can love out there.
The second half of second John works the same way.
Verses eight to 11 say it is of utmost importance that there not be deception in here, so that we can bear truth out there.
Verse seven says, the world needs truth in love.
verses eight to 11 says, there's of utmost importance that we in here must know the truth so that we as a church can bear witness in a world that is lost in deception to that which is true.
Which comes down to the all important question.
Where do we find this truth?
What is this truth that will save us
from the deceptions of this world.
It turns out the one truth that rescues us and this world from the deceptions of the evil one is found in verse 7.
Jesus Christ coming in the flesh.
the incarnation of Jesus is the truth that saves us from being deceived in this world and is the truth that will rescue this world from the deceptions, the antichrists, the plots and plans of the Father of life.
It all boils down to Jesus Christ, God incarnate coming in the flesh.
So this morning, let me give us five truths that we can draw from the incarnation that if we understand these, believe these, get these, live these, own these,
They will rescue us from the deceptions of this world, whether on the political and cultural left, or the political cultural right, or somewhere in between.
Five truths, all based in the incarnation.
Number one, God loves us.
God loves you.
God loves me.
God loves this world.
1 John 5 verse 9.
This is how God showed his love among us.
He sent his one and only son into the world that we might live through him.
The first truth that the incarnation teaches us is that we are loved by God.
I've said this before and I will say it again.
The most momentous truth in all the universe is that God is love.
And God demonstrates his love for us in that Jesus became human.
The incarnation is the objective statement of this truth.
You are loved by God.
This, by the way, is the root lie.
that the Father of lies uses all the time, telling us that somehow God is angry with us, that God doesn't care about us, that God's busy with other things, that if God really loved us, He wouldn't let us go through what we're going through.
If God really loved us, He would do something about the doubts that we have, or the physical suffering we have, or the mental anguish that we're going through, that if God really loved us, He wouldn't withhold these things that we want
from us, this is the root lie, and the incarnation is trying to save us from this deception, which is you are loved.
You are of no matter what you do, no matter who you are, you are loved.
And many of the deceptions in this world would melt away if we could grasp and understand how loved we are.
by God.
Second truth that the incarnation teaches us.
Selflessness is the pathway to blessing.
I wanted this point to be longer, but it didn't look as good on the screen.
What it really should be, selflessness, sacrifice, and suffering are the pathway to blessing in Philippians chapter two.
We are told that even though Jesus is God, he did not consider his deity as something to be held onto, but instead, being self-less, he became a human, the incarnation.
And not only did he become a human, he became obedient to the worst possible suffering
even to the point of dying in rejection from his father.
Because he did this, God has given Jesus the name that is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee will bow in heaven and on earth and under the earth and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord.
Jesus himself said, the son of man, me,
did not come to be served but to serve and to give his life as a ransom for many.
The world tells us that selfishness is the pathway to blessing.
The world tells us that if you and I seek after political power or money or education or influence or relationships or feeling good or money or whatever it may be, that this is the pathway to blessing.
But if we can grasp the truth, that selflessness, suffering and sacrifice, this is actually the pathway to blessing.
that will rescue us from many of the deceptions in this world.
Truth number three, from the incarnation.
Sin requires a payment.
In Galatians 2, verse 21, it says this, I do not set aside the grace of God, for if righteousness could be gained through the law
Christ died for nothing.
What Paul is trying to say in Galatians is, look, if sin's not a big deal, why did Jesus become human?
If it doesn't really matter, if God could have just waved His hand and said, oh, that's okay, why would He have His Son become human for eternity?
Why would He have Him do this?
The deceptions in this world are either, oh no, sin's not that big a deal.
You just don't have to worry about it.
Or no, no, we can handle sin through law and behavior.
Both of those things underestimate the power of sin and Satan's deceiving us on both sides.
The truth of the matter is if sin was easily dealt with, God would have chosen any other way.
But the truth of the incarnation is sin is absolutely eternally serious.
And Jesus became human because there was no other way, no other way.
The more we grasp that truth, the more it will save us from the deceptions that are all over this world.
Number four,
All humans have dignity.
James chapter three, God says this, with the tongue we praise our Lord and Father, and with it we curse human beings who have been made in God's likeness.
Out of the same mouth, come praise and cursing my brothers and sisters, this
should not be.
James is saying that all human beings, regardless of sexual orientation, regardless of sinfulness, ability or disability, age, gender, all human beings, all human beings are created in the image of God.
That gives every human being dignity.
But how much more dignity do humans have because God is now one of us?
Jesus has become human.
This dignifies humanity in an infinite way.
This is why Jesus says in Matthew 25, look, the stuff you did for the prisoner, the stuff you did for the foreigner,
The stuff you did for the fatherless person.
The stuff you did for the poor person.
The stuff you did for the lonely person.
You were doing that for me.
Why?
Because as a human, Jesus is our brother.
And any kindness and dignity you and I show to another human being.
We're showing to Jesus.
Because Jesus is human.
The incarnation changes everything.
No other human deserves the same level of honor and praise that Jesus does.
But every single human deserves dignity, care, and compassion because Jesus is human.
Truth number five from the incarnation.
truth is a person.
And we have to follow his example.
Truth is a person.
In this world, we are told that truth is abstract ideas.
But Jesus says, I am the truth.
Truth is a living person.
and truth became a person so that we might follow his example.
1 Peter 2, verse 21 to 23 says, to this you were called because Christ suffered for you, leaving you what?
An example that you and I should follow in his steps.
He committed no sin
and no deceit was found in his mouth.
When they hurled insults at him, he did not retaliate.
When he suffered, he made no threats.
Instead, he entrusted himself to the one who judges, justly.
Truth is not a set of ideas.
Truth is an incarnate person.
And when we walk like Jesus, when we act like Jesus, when we talk like Jesus, when we interact with our enemies, the way that Jesus interacted with his enemies, when we endure suffering the way Jesus endured suffering, we are not being deceived.
The more we grasp this truth, the less we are susceptible to the deceptions of this world.
These are five truths that the incarnation teaches us.
The more we understand these truths, the less power the Father of lies has over us.
Now that's very hopefully beautiful and theological and a blessing.
But let me give you a few practical things from this as well.
Look with me at verse 12 of 2nd John.
This is the doorway into some very practical applications of this incarnational truth.
John says, I have much to write to you, but I do not want to use paper and ink.
Instead, I hope to visit you and talk with you face to face so that our joy may be complete.
Please do not miss what John is saying.
John is writing scripture.
You understand?
He's writing the inspired Word of God.
He's writing 2nd John and he says, I have more to say to you, but I'm not going to write it down.
Why?
Because something more happens in incarnational face-to-face ministry that can't even happen through the Scriptures.
Second, John is not any longer because John realized there are things I need to do face to face.
I mean, John himself says this in his gospel.
He's like, look, if we tried to write down everything that Jesus did, there wouldn't be enough books.
If all it was was just an instruction book, then why did Jesus become human?
Why didn't God just drop the instruction manual from the sky and say, hey, read this and do that?
It's because the incarnation cannot be replaced by anything else.
There is something that happens face to face.
There is something that happens incarnationally.
There is something that happens through presence that not even the scripture itself can accomplish.
This is why the Scriptures without the Spirit are useless.
So practically speaking, this means if you've got something to say to another person, email and text is your last choice, especially if it's something difficult.
A phone call is better than an email and an in-person meeting is better than a phone call.
truth is meant to be communicated face to face.
And if you have something hard to say to somebody, if you've got to point out to somebody, somebody has sin in their life, if you've got to tell them how they've hurt you, we're looking for face to face interactions as much as possible because there is something that is communicated human to human.
That even the written word of God cannot communicate.
Now I'm not devaluing the Bible because the Bible with the Spirit is infinitely powerful.
But the truth of what John is writing here is trying to tell us, look, if this stuff could be accomplished from a distance, then Jesus would have remained in heaven.
It has to be done face to face.
This is why AI, social media, and dating apps,
will always be subject to deception.
It doesn't mean they can't be used for good, but they are especially susceptible to deception because they are not embodied experiences.
The problem with deception is you don't know when you're being deceived.
It's really helpful to recognize.
AI is just giving you words.
There's no life.
There's no spirit.
There's no body.
Those words can be used by God for good, but they are especially subject to deception because of this.
Listen, if John can't even put the words into inspired scripture without being face to face, what hope is there that a dating app or a social media platform or AI is going to be able to communicate
truth without embodiment.
Again, it doesn't mean that those things can't be used for good.
There is no part of me standing up here saying have nothing to do with that stuff.
I'm just saying, beware, they will always be subject to deception.
I mean, come on.
If you've used a dating app, there's a lot of deception going on, right?
It just proves the point.
John himself said 2,000 years ago, look, even though I'm writing scripture, there's something far more powerful that happens face to face.
This is why attending church in person is so absolutely important.
There are many that can be here in person who watch online and we're grateful for that.
but the ideal situation is that you come in person.
Because incarnation is the protection against deception.
We learn truth together.
We encourage one another together.
Jesus is present with us when we gather together.
This is the plan.
We spend the world living in deception and we come and we meet with Jesus each and every week so that He can help us be set free from those deceptions.
This is why for Lent, we are encouraging you to share Jesus with neighbors, co-workers, friends.
You might think to yourself, but there's somebody else that could better answer their questions than me.
Or maybe they're going to get better answers on the internet to their intellectual questions.
Or somebody else is going to have something better to say than I will.
But you're present in their life.
Don't underestimate the power of that.
You're present in their life.
You know them.
They know you.
And yes, you may not have the perfect answer to everything.
But guess what?
You're the perfect answer.
The fact that you're in their life, the fact that you're praying for them, the fact that you care about them, you are Jesus to them.
So don't think I got somebody else would do a better job.
Know you're in their life for this reason.
Simply handing them a book, giving them something to read on the internet.
That does not have the same power as you as their friend, their cousin,
their co-worker, the kid in school sitting next to them, when you look at them and say, hey, you want to come to church with me?
When you say to them, look, I don't have all the answers to your questions, but I love Jesus, and he loves you too.
There is nothing more powerful than that.
That's why we're doing Lent the way we're doing it this year.
This is also why the church is the hope for this city.
and this world.
We are the body of Christ.
Do you know what that means?
We are the incarnation of Jesus in Grand Rapids, Michigan today.
Now there's other incarnations of Jesus.
Thank God for that.
We're not the only ones.
But we are the body of Christ.
No businesses.
No government is.
No school is.
This is not said about anybody else.
We are the incarnation of Jesus in this world, a world that is under the control of the evil one who has no idea how they're being deceived.
The only hope for such a world is not more education, not better laws, not better policies.
All that stuff is fine, but the hope when you're deceived, you don't know you're being deceived.
To deceive people, all the laws look good.
To deceive people, the educational stuff all sounds right.
The only hope for deceived people is Jesus Christ in the flesh.
When he left heaven, when he left to go to heaven, he did not leave this world alone.
He said, I will send you my spirit and more two or three of you gather together in my name.
I will be present and on this earth today,
Jesus is incarnated in us.
Government is an institution.
Businesses are institutions.
Schools are institutions.
The church is a people.
If we stop meeting, there wouldn't be a church.
Some bylaws, not constitutions, it's not buildings.
It is an embodied group
of people, because we are the incarnation of Jesus in this world, and that's the only hope to avoid deception.